Add spec.md (#35)
ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-serdes: docs/spec/spec.md

# Specification: Ballerina SerDes Library

_Owners_: @MohamedSabthar @shafreenAnfar @ThisaruGuruge  

> _Reviewers_:   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Reviewers_: @shafreenAnfar @ThisaruGuruge    
```

Author: Added

The conforming implementation of the specification is released and included in the distribution. Any deviation from the specification is considered a bug.

## Contents

1. [Overview](#1-overview)
2. [Proto3Schema](#2-proto3schema)
	* 2.1 [`init` function](#21-init-function)
	* 2.2 [`serialize` function](#22-serialize-function)
	* 2.3 [`deserialize` function](#23-deserialize-function)
3. [Ballerina anydata to proto3 mapping](#3-ballerina-anydata-to-proto3-mapping)
	* 3.1 [Ballerina primitives](#31-ballerina-primitives)
	* 3.2 [Array](#32-array)
	* 3.3 [Union](#33-union)
	* 3.4 [Record](#34-record)
	* 3.5 [Map](#35-map)
	* 3.6 [Table](#36-table)
	* 3.7 [Tuple](#37-tuple)
	* 3.8 [Enum](#38-enum)
4. [Sample](#4-sample)

## 1. Overview
This specification elaborates on functionalities provided by SerDes library and how SerDes library maps the Ballerina anydata to a protocol buffer type.

> ## 2. Proto3Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Proto3
```

Author: the class name we used goes as `Proto3Schema`

`Proto3Schema` class provides APIs to perform serialization and deserialization of Ballerina anydata using protocol buffers (proto3). Following is the class definition of `Proto3Schema`

```ballerina
public class Proto3Schema {

>   *Schema;

Reviewer: Let's add a section to describe the `Schema` class, and how someone can use it to write their own serializers/deserializers.

Author: Moved to it own section

  public isolated function init(typedesc<anydata> ballerinaDataType) returns Error? {
        check generateSchema(self, ballerinaDataType);
  }

  // Implementation of serialize(), deserialize() functions goes here
}
```

```ballerina
// serdes Error

> public type Error distinct error; 

Reviewer: Why are we including the error definition here? I think we don't need this, although describing the error type and its occurrences could be useful.

Author: removed

> // Abstract object

Reviewer: We don't use the `Abstract Object` concept in Ballerina. This is an object type in Ballerina.

Author: Comment removed

> public type Schema object {

Reviewer: This definition should be placed earlier than the proto3Schema.

Author: Moved to the new section `Schema object`

### 2.2 `serialize` function
Serializes the value passsed as the argument and returns `byte[]` on successful serialization or an `Error` on failure. The underlying implementation uses the previously generated proto3 message definition to serialize the provided value. Passing a value that doesn't match the type provoided during the instantiation of `Proto3Schema` object may results  in a serialization failure.

### 2.3 `deserialize` function
Deserializes the provided `byte[]` argument and returns the ballerina value with the type represented by the typedesc value provided during the `Proto3Schema` object instantiation. The underlying implementation uses the generated proto3 message definition to serialize the provided value. Passing a `byte[]` that is not a serialized value of of the specified type may result in a deserilization failure or a garbage value.

## 3. Ballerina anydata to proto3 mapping
As specified `Proto3Schema` dynamically generates proto3 message definition for given subtypes of Ballerina anydata. Following sections defines the mapping for each subtypes.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed

      DecimalValue decimal___unionField  = 2;
    }
    element_1___UnionBuilder element_1  = 1;
    element_2___UnionBuilder element_2  = 2;
  }
  message element_1___TupleBuilder {
    message DecimalValue {
       uint32 scale  = 1;
       uint32 precision  = 2;
       bytes value  = 3;
    }
    bytes element_1  = 1;
    sint64 element_2  = 2;
    double element_3  = 3;
    bool element_4  = 4;
    string element_5  = 5;
    DecimalValue element_6  = 6;
  }
  element_1___TupleBuilder element_1  = 1;
  element_2___TupleBuilder element_2  = 2;
}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
<table>

### 3.8 Enum
Ballerina enum is a syntactic sugar of union of constant strings thus enum is handled as union in protobuf level
     <table >
<tr>
<th> Ballerina </th>
<th> Proto message </th>
 </tr>

<tr></tr>

<tr>
<td>
<pre>
enum Color {
    RED=”red”,
    GREEN,
    BLUE
}
</pre>
</td>
<td>
<pre>
message UnionBuilder {
   string string___unionField  = 1;
}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
<tr></tr>

<tr>
<td>
<pre>
const OPEN = "open";
const CLOSE = "close";
type <b>STATE</b> OPEN|CLOSE;
</pre>
</td>
<td>
<pre>
message <b>UnionBuilder</b> {
   string string___unionField  = 1;
}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
<table>

> ## 4. Sample

Reviewer: Let's add samples under each section when needed. We don't need a complete sample as a separate section.

Author: +1, moved to appropriate sections

The conforming implementation of the specification is released and included in the distribution. Any deviation from the specification is considered a bug.

## Contents

1. [Overview](#1-overview)
2. [Schema](#2-schema)
	* 2.1 [`serialize` function](#21-serialize-function)
	* 2.2 [`deserialize` function](#22-deserialize-function)
3. [Proto3Schema](#3-proto3schema)
	* 3.1 [`init` function](#31-init-function)
	* 3.2 [`serialize` function](#32-serialize-function)
	* 3.3 [`deserialize` function](#33-deserialize-function)
4. [Ballerina anydata to proto3 mapping](#4-ballerina-anydata-to-proto3-mapping)
	* 4.1 [Ballerina primitives](#41-ballerina-primitives)
	* 4.2 [Array](#42-array)
	* 4.3 [Union](#43-union)
	* 4.4 [Record](#44-record)
	* 4.5 [Map](#45-map)
	* 4.6 [Table](#46-table)
	* 4.7 [Tuple](#47-tuple)
	* 4.8 [Enum](#48-enum)

## 1. Overview
This specification elaborates on functionalities provided by the SerDes library and how the SerDes library maps the Ballerina anydata to a protocol buffer type.

## 2. Schema

> `Schema` object defines the API to perform serialization and deserialization of Ballerina anydata. One can include this `Schema` object in a class and implement their serialization and deserialization logic. The `Schema` object definition is as follows. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Schema` object defines the API to perform serialization and deserialization of Ballerina anydata. You can include this `Schema` object in a class and implement your serialization and deserialization logic. The `Schema` object definition is as follows. 
```

}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td colspan="2">
A (union) member array has the following name format for message field name and nested message name:
<ul>
<li>Field name format: `&lttype>___arrayField_&ltdimension>_unionField`</li>
<li>Nested message name format: `&lttype>_ArrayBuilder_&ltdimension>`</li>
</ul>
Here `&lttype>`, `&ltdimension>` used to avoid name collision in protobuf schema generation.
</td></tr>
<table>

3. Union of union-arrays

<table >
<tr>
<th> Ballerina </th>
<th> Proto message </th>
 </tr>

<tr></tr>

<tr>
<td>
<pre >
type IntOrString int|string;
</pre>
<pre >
type FloatOrNill float?;
</pre>
<pre >
type <b>UnionArray</b> IntOrString[]|FloatOrNill[];
</pre>
</td>
<td>
<pre>
message UnionBuilder {
  message IntOrString___UnionBuilder {
     sint64 int___unionField  = 1;
     string string___unionField  = 2;
  }
  message FloatOrNill___UnionBuilder {
     double float___unionField  = 1;
     bool nullField  = 2;
  }
  repeated IntOrString___UnionBuilder IntOrString___arrayField_1___unionField  = 1;
  repeated FloatOrNill___UnionBuilder FloatOrNill___arrayField_1___unionField  = 2;
}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
<table>

> ### 3.4 Record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4.4 Record
```
